Esteske Palmer face the nation.
Through the eyes of this live television camera in Washington, DC, your obfsee, Senator
Quastiske Palmer, Democrat of Tennessee, face the nation with questions from veteran
correspondents representing the American press here in the national capital.
And now the moderator of face the nation and director of CBS News and Public Affairs
in Washington, Ted Koop.
Senator Keep Auver, this morning, they occurred one of the major news events of the year.
The Austrian peace treaty was signed in Vienna, and plans were made for a meeting at the
summit of the Chiefs of State of Russia and the Western powers.
These developments may mark the first easing of tension in the Cold War between East
and West.
As a prominent senator and as a former candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination,
your views on these important subjects as well as on domestic issues carry great weight.
To ask you about your opinions, here is our panel of newsmen.
Will you make Lawrence National Correspondent for the New York Times, Dark Mullin-Hoff,
Washington Correspondent for the Minneapolis Star and Tribune, and Roland Evans Jr. of
the Washington Bureau of the Associated Press?
Now with the first question, Mr. Lawrence.
Senator, I suppose that all of us are happy that today in Vienna, Austria, at long last
and after 17 years, finally received her, received back her independence and sovereignty.
But I'm wondering whether your view of this is one of, shall we say, undiluted optimism
or do you have some misgivings about the treaty that went with this ceremony?
Well, Mr. Lawrence, we are of course glad that the communists are finally, relentless,
some of their more drastic claims in connection with giving Austria sovereignty, such as the
control of the oil fields and other items of dispute.
I think we should be glad about it and happy about it.
I do think that the communists have a good deal to gain themselves and that they hope
to form a, hope to have a neutral block in that part of Europe.
That certainly has been a very unsatisfactory condition in Austria.
They've made a fine recovery economically.
And I'm glad that the communists have come down from some of their higher demands and
that we can have this nation restored as a sovereign nation.
Well, Senator, aside from the mandatory neutrality provisions which were included in this treaty
on the insistence of the Kremlin, this is basically the same agreement which the German
administration had negotiated long ago with the other Western allies and which the Soviet
Union at that time refused to sign.
Is that right?
Yes, that's my understanding.
Well, what's your impression of why they now came to the point of signing?
Oh, that is the Russian.
Of course, there is the hope and we hope that it may be true that there is a different
attitude on the part of the communists that they may really want to less intentions and
to work out all of the different disputes and points of controversy so that we might
eventually have a satisfactory peace in the world.
But if that's not the case, then I suppose that their second reason would be that this
would be preparatory to trying to gain some concessions from the West.
I think that they might consider that by giving a liberal settlement to Austria, it might
have some influence upon the settlement of the German problem, try to keep West Germany
from being a full part of NATO and joining completely with the West.
Senator, along that line, I noticed that Mr. Molotov, the foreign minister of the Soviet
Union said today in Vienna that he hopes other states will follow the pattern, unquote,
of complete neutrality, mandatory neutrality that Austria has agreed to.
Do you feel that the possibility is that West Germany will also buy this new neutrality
line that Russia apparently is selling through Central Europe?
I'm certain that that would be one of the ambitions of the Soviet, but as long as Chancellor
Adonar is the head of the West German government, I don't think they will.
I think they're firmly committed to the West.
And I think that poses one of the big problems for the democracies of the North Atlantic to
integrate Western Germany firmly into the Western economy.
I think we've done very well.
And I think the Soviet hope of having a neutral block beginning with Yugoslavia and Austria
including Western Germany will not be realized as long as Chancellor Adonar is.
You spoke a second ago, Senator, of a hopeful attitude and the possibility of a hopeful attitude
that Russia really is changing her course.
Do you feel that the Eisenhower administration deserves a good deal of credit in its persistent
foreign policies in the last two years in this possibility of a change of direction in
Russia's foreign policy?
You feel that the President and the Secretary of State deserve credit for that?
I think the Eisenhower administration, particularly the President, have done many good things in
the foreign policy field.
I think they have made many mistakes.
Specifically what good things could we get that first and go to the States?
Well, they've at least recommended a substantial amount of foreign aid.
They've kept up the support for the United Nations for NATO.
They have generally followed the line of the Democratic foreign policy under President
Truman and Secretary of State Dean Atterson.
But I think if the Democrats had suggested such a summit conference two years ago or three
years ago that they would have had treason and communism and everything else scream that
them.
So that I think such Democratic leaders as Senator George and others and not only backing
up the idea of a top policy talk with communist Russia, but then fathering it and holding
up the President's hand, hands deserves a great deal of credit.
What about Senator Nolan and Bridges, Senator Keefer?
You mentioned Senator George.
Well, of course, Mr. Eisenhower's had a cold war in his own party with Senator Nolan
and with some others ever since he's been in power.
So that there is a point of no co-operation in support of Senator Nolan and some others
are concerned.
Now do you think of how we ought to go into this discussion with some optimism that we
must realize that it's going to be impossible to change a great deal.
We are only feeling out the Soviet intentions.
I think we would make a great mistake if we felt that everything was all over and now
that we could cut down our defense department, the interests and keeping militarily strong
because even if the Soviet is in, if they are in good faith, it's going to take years
and years and many, many other conferences, of course, to work out in any detail.
Senator, the polls would indicate that people generally feel that our foreign affairs
are being handled better under the Eisenhower administration and under the Truman administration.
I wonder if you feel I've seen those.
Difficult.
And I wonder if you could tell us why you think the people would feel this if there are
these things wrong with the policy that you indicate.
Well, of course, of course, the Korean War was brought to an end during the Republican
administration on terms, but I think there are great many people in certain of the
outfield, we're not too satisfactory.
We've had the unfortunate situation in the foremotion of the straits.
There have been other mistakes, such as the threat of massive retaliation that Secretary
Delos has made is an unfortunate debacle at Geneva.
There's a banditment for some time of the Western Alliance and leaving the problems
in Western Europe largely to Mr. Eden, but the turn of events have been rather favorable
toward an easing of attention recently, and I think the people are grateful for that.
You think that things are in better shape now than they were?
I think they're in better shape now than there were two months ago.
And I think there is a good possibility that there may be a substantially better shape
than they have been in a long, long time.
That is, if the communists are sincere, which we must find out in these conferences.
The Secretary of the House of Representatives, Secretary Delos, is going to make a report
to the nation Tuesday night in the President's office.
Do you expect that will be a bipartisan report that everyone can accept?
Well, Ted, I had the hope that after the injection of politics in our foreign affairs on some
occasions and the Democrats going along, and just the same, even though we've been
likely very much, had certainly in this very important conference, which is coming up, that
there would be a bipartisan approach.
I think it's a fine thing for the Secretary of State to come back and talk to the nation
and for the President to be there with him.
But I must say, in reading the paper this morning, that I was disappointed in the kind
of presentation that this is going to be to the people.
It looks like it's staged as another political affair, such as we saw Mr. Robert Montgomery
put on with a cap and sometimes back.
He's going to have there Mr. Delos, and of course the President and Vice President Nixon,
Mr. Secretary of Defense Wilson, Secretary of the Treasurer Umphries, Delegate Lodge, under
Secretary of State Herbert Hoover, Jr. Harold Stassen.
The Democrats who have done so much to strengthen our foreign policies, such as Senator George
and others, apparently are not to be included.
This looks like another presentation of Robert Montgomery presents the White House.
I can just imagine Mr. Umphries saying, well, Costa, how much is this going to cost in
Mr. Delos with planks?
Well, George's won't cost anything except my traveling expenses.
Senator, I get the impression you think the Democrats are going along too much, or do you
think this is a good idea for them to go along?
You raised some objection to the way the Democrats are going along?
No, the Democrats are going to go along in spite of the rebuffs that they might receive
from the Republicans.
But certainly we would have a better backing car, whatever comes out of a great conference
of this kind if we put on a bipartisan basis rather than may they just a political show
as it's indicated this will be.
Would you recommend that the President take Senator George or some other Democratic advisor
to the big foreign meeting?
I think he'd be very wise to do so.
Senator George is already indicated he wouldn't be too enthusiastic about going, Senator,
so that you might have to find another Democrat.
Well, I imagine there would be plenty who would be willing to go, but I would ask that
you would be prepared.
Would you, or yourself, Senator Keifl?
I think we would put up to Senator George that he would be of service, and certainly
he would be glad to go.
Of course, I'd be happy to go, but I'm not on the Foreign Relations Committee.
I'm not intimately the tales to date brought out in executive sessions, so properly someone
on the one of the Foreign Relations Committee should go.
Senator, in such as Dick Richards in the House, the Mike Mansfield, or many very capable
men.
Senator, a few minutes ago in listing some of the blunders of the administration, you
spoke not only about the Korean War, settlement not being satisfactory in your point of view,
but also about the dangerous situation in the four most estates.
You aspired, sir, to be president in 1952.
How would you handle the four most in problem if you were president?
Build a beginning with, I wouldn't have gotten into this political business of unleashing
Shanghai's share.
I think that was the basic mistake made by this administration in dealing with permosis.
Even let Oshang himself to believe he might have the strength to get back on the mainland
when all the proof even Admiral Radford was that at no time could he move unless he had
courses of the United States of helping.
Well, Senator, I think generally in the Far East that we've been looking at the small
things and overlooking the big important matters, the keys to whether in the Far East I think
or whether we will have a chance of democracy and surviving, lie with Japan and India and
not with these little offshore islands.
I would have first placed tried to settle and get some disposition made of for most a long,
long time ago.
I think it's been our obligation to do so.
We have been a trustee of that island.
It doesn't belong to us.
It doesn't belong to Shanghai's share.
Who doesn't belong to you, Senator?
It belongs to whoever the victors in the last World War decided it should belong to.
Senator, I was taken by the people.
I'm sorry, sir, but I don't think you've yet answered my question as to what you would
do if you were president.
We're getting pretty far, you're getting pretty academic if I were president.
Well, no, I don't think that's academic, Senator.
We're talking now in the field of policy.
What one man does is right or wrong.
How would you handle it?
Well, I think I've told you.
I certainly wouldn't have gotten mixed up with the islands.
I think we should have done something to dispose of for most of them and get it out of our
hands a long time ago.
I mean, the Red Chinese should have the islands.
No, I don't.
Oh, the islands.
The island offshore.
No, I would leave that as a matter of the civil war between Shanghai and the Red Chinese.
That's a matter of their own civil war in which we're not involved.
And I think it would be tragic to be drawn into a war over these islands, the names of which
we didn't know or many people didn't know until a few months ago.
And they're certainly in a very different position from Formosa and the Pesidor.
Senator, you say we're not involved in this war, in this civil war about the offshore
islands.
Do you think we will be?
We came precariously close to be.
We will.
I'm certain that if better judgment and calmer hands have not prevailed, we might have been
now.
What's going to happen now, apparently, Joe and Lai didn't do so well at Bang Gang as
he expected to do and he's now willing to arbitrate.
So there's a listening of the tension there, too.
But whether we will be involved later on, there's no one knows.
Senator, six weeks ago, along this same point, you made a, what some of us thought was
the fairly serious charge.
You said people in high places were plotting and planning to get the United States into
war over Formosa.
What people, Senator?
Mr. Evans, I said that inside of the Republican Party, there was a war party whose aim seemed
to be to get us into a war over the matter in China and the four Muslim streets.
By that I meant to have us take up the defense of Khmer and to Matsu, which I felt
would get us into war.
You only need to look at what's set on the Senate floor.
There are a number of senators who take that position.
Senator Bridges has taken that position, General Nolan.
And Admiral Radford, for some time, back has taken that position.
I'm plotting to get us into war.
Well, I'm planning to defend these islands, which I consider loving to get us into war.
Senator, I'd like to turn around.
Senator, I'm going to rhetoric, Mr. Evans.
I was going a little stronger than I should have.
I would like to turn from past politics to future politics and ask you the direct question,
are you going to be a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination next year?
Well, Mr. Cooper, I'm not a candidate and I have no plans to be a candidate.
Would you decline to be one?
If we're pressed upon you?
I mean, would I make a Sherman statement?
Well, Mr. Cooper, I happened to live in that part of the South where Sherman had a scorched
policy of March to the sea.
I never have liked Mr. Sherman very much, General Sherman, and I'm not going to emulate it.
Senator?
Anyway, I have no plans at present time.
Senator, you had 360 delegates at the 1952 convention.
Yes, ma'am.
I wonder what you're doing to keep in contact with those people.
Are you doing anything?
No, I really have it.
I haven't tried to keep together any organization and I haven't purposely followed up with any
of these delegates.
Well, Senator, you have a committee, a juvenile and a juvenile and a juvenile committee,
and I know a lot of your enemies point to this as something I don't have any particular
enemies.
Political enemies, shall we say.
Right of this is something similar to the crime show, which you would use to put yourself
on the road again in 1956.
And I wondered, what is the reason for a federal investigation of juvenile lengthency and something
which is basically state and local problem?
This problem of juvenile to lengthency is one that we must be have some action on it,
all levels of government.
The federal government plays a much more important part than many others realize.
After all, there are many federal laws.
We have young people violating those laws.
We have charge of narcotics.
We have charge of things that happen in interstate commerce, such as the transportation of
horror and cram books and a salacious literature.
We have charge of what goes on the television and great many things of that sort.
I became interested in the juvenile to lengthency investigation as a result of what we saw in
the crime committee that many of these criminals might have been good citizens if they had had
better opportunities.
So I felt a committee could point out for other people in the nation what could be done
in this field, bring about interest in the problem, pass a great many federal statutes
which would help.
But Senator, we are doing a very professional modest kind of job with that.
Senator, are there a lot more things that the Senate could be doing?
You talked before the first of this year, you talked a great deal about investigations
in the power field.
And there was one started in the Republican Congress by Senator Langer and you're on a committee
that hasn't followed through on that.
I wonder what the problem is there.
Well, it just dumps me that we haven't followed through with more of these investigations.
I think in the field of favoritism to the private electric utilities and to the big interest
generally that the Republican Party is very vulnerable.
Well, is the, and I think our economy generally is in danger of where the little fellow, little
businessman is not going to have much of a chance if this merger and monopoly trend goes
on.
Well, is this also with the Democratic leadership in the Senate because you can't get these
investigations going?
Well, where's the fall there, regardless of the merit of the investigation itself?
Well, as far as the Senate, the anti-monopoly committee was concerned, it was Senator Langer
who, with his own staff, carried on the investigation last year.
No money was appropriated by the Republican Congress.
I've been bitterly disappointed that this Congress has not gotten started earlier.
Have you taken up with the leadership?
Yes, I have discussed the matter with the leadership and Senator Johnson has hoped that the
investigation would get going too.
Has he done anything to get it moving?
Yes, when the resolution came, he got the resolution through the Senate and the appropriation
through.
Where's the roadblock on this, Senator?
The roadblock has been in getting the staff and getting an internal matter of the committee
settled so that we can get started.
Well, Senator, to return to politics, if we may.
Anyway, I hope we do.
And we've wasted a lot of time.
I'm awfully disappointed.
We're missing.
We should be doing this in the public interest.
And then I think it's one of the most important issues before the nation today.
To return to general politics, you say that you're not a candidate and you have no intention
of being one.
Is there no significance then in the fact that you're up in streethouses for sale and
I thought maybe you might be getting ready to move into 1600?
Oh, Mr. Lawrence, I didn't know our house for sale.
We've been thinking about trying to get a larger one because we have four children
that are growing up.
There is a bigger one down there on the avenue.
But the 1500 Pennsylvania.
That's the one I meant.
Yeah, so there's a bigger building.
I don't know.
The children like it out of where we are and they're one of the chief objectives to doing
anything except the time to stay in the Senate.
You would have to be saying that you've made no effort to keep in contact with what could
have been described as your organization in 1952.
But I checked the record here just briefly and find in the last six months or so you have
spoken in Texas Illinois, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, Nebraska, Iowa, Indiana, Oregon, California,
several other states.
I didn't know anybody was following me so closely.
Well, so you have a lot of it.
You have a lot of it in my reserve and I just wondered if this fits with your previous statement
that you may know effort to keep in touch with the delegations you had patched to you
with the future.
And you have passed.
I have spoken a great many more places than I have during the past.
This is not to be taken as an indication that you want to keep contacts going with your
friends in these states, your democratic friends in these states.
No, always when the Democratic National Committee has asked me to go somewhere, I usually
go.
One other question along that line, Senator.
What happened to the...
Of course, I must say I'm glad to see my friends.
What happened to the organization for the Chattanooga, I think in November, called the
organization for 10 million signatures for a key fall for president.
Is that still happening?
That was a youth group and I told them I thought that the better not to go on with it.
That isn't defunct.
It's not defunct that just defunct is a bad connotation.
I didn't mean that connotation.
It's not actually...
Well, when I heard about it, I suggested that they not to carry it on.
Just me doing favor for the presidential nomination, Senator.
Well, I haven't been taking it a size in that context, Mr. Cruz.
This is the fact that you're not going to run mean that you're going to leave the Tennessee
delegation go to Governor Clement.
He seems to have very definite ambition.
Well, I imagine Tennessee delegation will make up its minds the time draws near and they
see what the...
The Elecates are...
The Elecates have to be wooed a little bit, do you know?
You found that out.
It's a good time, yet though, Mr. Lawrence, from now until the time of the convention.
You have no plans, though.
No, I don't.
No, I'm not.
Well, that's the time already.
I do not have any plans.
There's another subject we should discuss this afternoon, Senator, and that's the polio
vaccine situation, which has aroused a great deal of interest throughout the country and
in Congress.
Do you feel that the administration, particularly the Department of Health Education and
Welfare, has handled the situation properly?
I think this has been one of the worst bungled programs and needlessly bungled that I've
ever seen.
There's been no excuse for this on again, off again, where it's been handled.
They've handled it in Canada so that it haven't been any mishaps.
They haven't been the bad vaccine and they're uncertainly about the program that we've had
here.
They had a well thought out regulations before they started.
I think that they should have taken a little more time, gotten up a system for handling the
program, and then which would anticipate all of these difficulties and gone at it.
Senator, who do you think is the president?
As a present time, I think the only thing to do is for the government to allocate the
vaccine and also for us to adopt a bill prohibiting profiteering from the manufacturer.
Senator, who's to blame for this bungling that you speak out here?
Well, the president of the United States and Secretary Haby, of course.
In what specific way are they to blame?
Do you have anything in fact?
First place for not having a program for the proper inspection to see that the vaccine
was pure, not having a program where when they started out they could carry it on for
the vaccination of these children.
There's no excuse whatsoever for starting and stopping and starting and stopping and
scaring a lot of people to death and also apparently hurting the health of some young
people by allowing the impure vaccine to be used.
Wouldn't they be depending upon people further down in the department with the tech nations?
Or do you think they were flooding them?
I think the time has come when we can't just place the burden on somebody way down in the
department.
The president and the cabinet members themselves must assume responsibility and they have done
a horrible job in connection with this vaccine.
Well, it was just part of the strategy that you and some others have been advocating in
recent months in the Democratic Party to take what, taking it easy with the president
and put all the blame on its abordinates and that they really ought to level on the number
one target at these the fellow they're going to have to run against.
Well, Mr. Lawrence, I think Democrats all the way through have been very generous in
not letting the president pass off responsibility and it's not a matter of strategy, it's just
a matter of the facts of life that he and he alone is responsible for these big mistakes
that are occurring in his administration.
And the polio is one of the big mistakes in your view.
I think it's a very substantial one in which the people are tremendously.
You're going to hurt him politically, Senator?
Uh, yes, I'm sure it will.
Senator, this coming week, I believe you're bringing out a report on civil defense after
some hearings that you and the subcommittee held.
Could you give us an advance look into that report?
Well, we are fine, generally, that there's been a tragic lack of interest both in the
administration and in Congress and among the people in civil defense.
It is a vital part for the protection of the nation if we should get into war and plans
must be made.
More specifically, we are going to recommend that the military departments should take more
responsibility.
There should be better working out of programs.
We're going to recommend that a commission be set up to study and report on the matter
of dispersal of industries.
We want to find the responsibility for who is going to feed and take care of people when
they're evacuated and why the Department of Health, Education and Well Centre have done
it.
Our time is almost up and there's one question I wanted to ask you before we get through.
What do you think of this campaign for David Crocket?
Well, I think David is one of the finest influences and one of the best candidates that I've
seen.
Did he steal your Kuhnskin cap?
No, he had it before I got it in 1948.
Thank you, Senator Keep, our time is up.
Thank you for facing the nation and answering the questions from William H. Lawrence of
the New York Times, dark mullenhof of the Minneapolis Star and Tribune, and Roland Evans
Jr. of the Associated Press.
This program has come to you from Washington, the nation's capital.
Ted Kuhnp is your moderator today on Face the Naceneers, your director Robert Quinn,
associated in production, Nancy Huntsman, produced by Ted Er.
Today on the CBS Public Affairs program, you saw through the eyes of this live television
camera, Senator Estes Kuhnpover, Democrat of Tennessee, Face the Nation.
Next week, see another figure prominent on the American political scene, Face the Nation,
and now, stepler speaking.
This is the CBS Television Network.